[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of the scene in the unseen I have a recommendation for you
[Amit Varma]: Do check out Pulya Bazi hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Kotesane, two really good friends of mine
[Amit Varma]: Kick-ass podcast in Hindi. It's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: I grew up in the 1980s and 1990s when the state of the media looked very different from today
[Amit Varma]: Everyone got the news from a handful of mainstream newspapers and magazines and TV stations
[Amit Varma]: And while there may have been some biases here and there, there was by and large a consensus on the truth
[Amit Varma]: All of us lived in the same world
[Amit Varma]: But that world has changed. The media is fragmented
[Amit Varma]: We all get our news and facts from different sources and there is no longer that consensus
[Amit Varma]: We can all choose the reality
[Amit Varma]: We wish to inhabit and can find supporting facts from it whether those facts are true facts or alternative facts as the lingo now goes
[Amit Varma]: We can all choose to form our own echo chambers and we can all choose to live in different worlds. In all of this
[Amit Varma]: What does it mean to be a journalist? Are we all just suppliers?
[Amit Varma]: Fulfilling the demands of a particular segment of the marketplace or do we have a dharma that goes beyond that?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics politics and behavioral science, please. Welcome your host
[Amit Varma]: Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene of the unseen in today's episode
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to be talking about the state of the media a subject I covered in an earlier episode with my friend Prem Panicker
[Amit Varma]: My guests today are Siddharth Bhatia founder editor of the wire the outstanding independent online site at the wire dot in and
[Amit Varma]: Peter Griffin my old friend who now works as a senior editor at the Hindu, but before that a brief commercial break
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls
[Amit Varma]: Well worry no more head on over to Indian colors comm Indian colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the best artists in India and
[Amit Varma]: Adapts them into objects of everyday use these include wearable art like stoles and shrugs
[Amit Varma]: Home decor like cushion covers and table runners and accessories like tote bags
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price and artists get royalties on sales
[Amit Varma]: Just like authors do what's more Indian colors now has an exciting range of new products
[Amit Varma]: Including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo x Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting but even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indiancolors.com that's colors with an OU and if you want a 20% discount apply the code IVM20
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM for IVM podcast IVM20 for a 20% discount at Indiancolors.com
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen Siddharth and Peter welcome to the show
[Guest 1]: Hi Amit lovely to be here
[Guest 1]: Thank you Amit it's been a while coming but I'm happy I'm here
[Amit Varma]: Siddharth you were mentioning earlier when we were chatting before the show that you started working in 1976
[Amit Varma]: That's right
[Amit Varma]: What brought you into journalism?
[Guest 1]: So one story that I give out is that jobs employment in those days was difficult for a generalist graduate
[Guest 1]: The services were obviously one option and I was not good enough for it and nor was I interested quite honestly
[Guest 1]: The State Bank of India probationary exam was the other and banking did not excite me
[Guest 1]: So really by and large the chances of getting a proper job employment was difficult
[Guest 1]: The economy was growing a bit slowly and there was the emergency
[Guest 1]: So things were ironically joining you know as a journalist during the emergency was a look like a very counterintuitive decision
[Guest 1]: But I got to know that there were some jobs going for trainees in the free press journal
[Guest 1]: Which was in those days a very very feisty small independent minded newspaper
[Guest 1]: And I applied there was a test of general knowledge writing skills etc
[Guest 1]: Some 30-40 people applied they took three abysmal salary
[Guest 1]: But I had a kind of fondness for writing I had actually written for them as a freelancer
[Guest 1]: So got it and that's how I began and as I said it was the emergency
[Guest 1]: In fact it was bang in the middle of that 19 month period
[Guest 1]: Difficult times to be quite honest even me at even I at my level felt those things
[Guest 1]: You couldn't write so many things copy had to be sent to censors
[Guest 1]: But as I now like to say you eventually get through the darkest periods
[Amit Varma]: And so because those were the days of the emergency and you know you said you picked free press journal
[Amit Varma]: In particular because of a feisty were you then also driven at the time by a sense of purpose
[Amit Varma]: Like what was journalism to you what was your duty
[Guest 1]: I don't think I at least and there were hardly any training institutes
[Guest 1]: I don't think there were I don't think that kind of mission sense of mission was driving any journalist
[Guest 1]: But you always understood a few things instinctively
[Guest 1]: First of all the emergency had made even largely a political types into political animals
[Guest 1]: It didn't show up in the media but we were kind of there
[Guest 1]: And as a student in a college which had all these lefties hanging around
[Guest 1]: You know even Bombay was pretty fired up in those days
[Guest 1]: I there was a sense and somehow writers and those kind of people came into one's orbit
[Guest 1]: And you got to know about journalism so that sense was there
[Guest 1]: The sense of mission unstated unwritten non codified was there in the newsroom
[Guest 1]: And it permeated your DNA very very rapidly in many ways
[Guest 1]: For example you sense that you had to write the underdogs point of view
[Guest 1]: The citizens voice made it to the pages of the newspapers including the bigger ones
[Guest 1]: Rather than you know business did not dominate the economy the way it does now
[Guest 1]: So if you wrote something about big business no harm done
[Guest 1]: Business sections were small there were hardly any papers
[Guest 1]: You covered trade unions again I wish to make this a special point
[Guest 1]: The city this city was a working-class city at that time
[Guest 1]: Strong trade unions mill workers unions
[Guest 1]: So you covered them you went to their press conference
[Guest 1]: That railway strike had just happened in 74 so it was
[Guest 1]: So it came in that not that you were a activist
[Guest 1]: None of us were allowed to be activists
[Guest 1]: But you realize that you needed to get common voices into the pages of paper
[Guest 1]: So I suppose if you want to term it as a mission that gets in
[Guest 1]: The mission of course you mentioned the truth
[Guest 1]: I don't think that was our mission our mission was to get the facts right
[Guest 1]: Right I always say leave the truth to those guys in the Himalayas
[Guest 1]: Get your facts right and I think we have started playing fast and loose with facts
[Guest 1]: Siddharth when did you see this changing
[Guest 1]: In two or three different ways the changes have been coming
[Guest 1]: One of the big changes was this will sound very unconnected in the beginning
[Guest 1]: But when salary started going up in the 80s
[Guest 1]: Journalists a better class of educated journalists came in
[Guest 1]: Magazines sprung up and businessmen started investing
[Guest 1]: A magazine which were glossy came up
[Guest 1]: So there was a demand for journalists from publications
[Guest 1]: There was a lot of movement around and when salary started going up
[Guest 1]: Two things happened one is that the old wage board system stopped
[Guest 1]: And the contract system came in
[Guest 1]: And the contract system allowed you to get really handsome salaries
[Guest 1]: No longer controlled by a central agency
[Guest 1]: The second thing that happened is that
[Guest 1]: Journalists started becoming part of the establishment
[Guest 1]: Because now they were getting paid better
[Guest 1]: They were wearing better clothes
[Guest 1]: They were moving around in circles business journalism had come in
[Guest 1]: So journalists started thinking that they were on equal terms with big business etc
[Guest 1]: When that happens you come close to those people you are writing about
[Guest 1]: And really honestly journalists shouldn't have two close friends
[Guest 1]: From anyone in the establishment political economic anything
[Guest 1]: I'm sure you read the film press or the sports media and all that
[Guest 1]: You'll rarely see critical articles because they're so close in a sense embedded
[Guest 1]: The same thing with politics and the same thing with business
[Guest 1]: So that was one shift
[Guest 1]: The other shift came when in the 90s
[Guest 1]: This new concept came of invitation price
[Guest 1]: I'm sorry I'm taking up too much time
[Guest 1]: But the invitation price of a publication
[Guest 1]: I got my morning paper for two rupees
[Guest 1]: One rupee actually when it began
[Guest 1]: This was a Murdoch formula
[Guest 1]: If I'm getting it at one rupee and the cost of production is nine rupees
[Guest 1]: Who subsidizes the rest?
[Amit Varma]: The advertiser
[Guest 1]: The advertiser subsidize 80, 85, 90 percent of your price
[Guest 1]: Goes to show that the advertiser has control over 80 to 90 percent of your revenue
[Guest 1]: And therefore your space and your thought process
[Guest 1]: And your decision making process
[Guest 1]: So large organizations
[Guest 1]: And everyone says Bennett Coleman started doing it
[Guest 1]: But the fact of the matter Bennett did it most successfully
[Guest 1]: And the others jumped in
[Guest 1]: As they have jumped in with media net
[Guest 1]: As they have jumped in with other things
[Guest 1]: Paid news and all that kind of thing
[Guest 1]: To be quite honest
[Guest 1]: Sometimes if you read the Times of India today
[Guest 1]: You get a far more comprehensive picture of what's happening in the city
[Guest 1]: In the country and all that
[Guest 1]: Because they have also invested in people
[Guest 1]: And that you know that core strength hasn't disappeared
[Guest 1]: But a lot of people have given that up
[Amit Varma]: And started introducing these
[Amit Varma]: As a columnist for the Times of India
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of glad you said that
[Amit Varma]: But this shift therefore basically what happened was
[Amit Varma]: That you are saying newspapers instead of producing journalism for readers
[Amit Varma]: Started producing readers for advertisers
[Guest 1]: Yes, yes, yes
[Guest 1]: People have said publicly
[Guest 1]: We are an ad platform
[Guest 1]: This echoes what I think it was Beaverbrook
[Guest 1]: Or somebody who said that you know
[Amit Varma]: News is what you put
[Amit Varma]: And was this driven by compulsion or greed?
[Amit Varma]: Like did the earlier model not work for them to have to do this?
[Amit Varma]: Or was this simply more
[Guest 1]: Well look at it this way
[Guest 1]: If you are chugging along very well
[Guest 1]: And you are happy with a 40 crore turnover
[Guest 1]: The model working
[Guest 1]: Okay
[Guest 1]: Because you are making a profit of 5 crores or 6 crores or whatever
[Guest 1]: You are a profitable organization
[Guest 1]: Influence is fantastic
[Guest 1]: Everyone says salam to the bosses
[Guest 1]: But if you go from 40 crore turnover to 250
[Guest 1]: Then 500
[Guest 1]: Which model are you going to choose?
[Amit Varma]: Right
[Amit Varma]: As a businessman who
[Guest 1]: You know you have to do right to your shareholders
[Guest 1]: You are talking at this moment
[Guest 1]: In the 80s I remember
[Guest 1]: A multinational chief executive
[Guest 1]: Had once said to a few of us
[Guest 1]: Your publication is making more money than I am in this country
[Guest 1]: And I have been here for 100 years
[Guest 1]: So once that happened
[Guest 1]: The journalist became the tool or the vehicle
[Guest 1]: To deliver content
[Guest 1]: And to give those this
[Guest 1]: Now how does it show up in real terms?
[Guest 1]: It shows up in the following way
[Guest 1]: The morning when a family person
[Guest 1]: You know husband, wife, whatever
[Guest 1]: Gets up
[Guest 1]: Reads the newspaper
[Guest 1]: Has a cup of coffee
[Guest 1]: Is about to tuck into the cereal
[Guest 1]: And there is a photograph of somebody bleeding on the front page
[Guest 1]: And that day either his or somebody else's product is in the solar space
[Guest 1]: The company is not going to like it
[Guest 1]: Because that's off-putting
[Guest 1]: So you start feeding Pablum
[Guest 1]: And you know keeping the reader happy
[Guest 1]: The advertiser happy
[Guest 1]: And generally creating this mythical, sweet, glowing world
[Guest 1]: News naturally takes a hit
[Guest 1]: And not all money gets funneled into news gathering
[Guest 1]: Because some idiot will want to go to a village
[Guest 1]: And come back with a story about an atrocity
[Guest 1]: I know I am simplifying it
[Guest 1]: But my bigger point is
[Guest 1]: These things started having
[Guest 1]: It's a long process
[Guest 1]: What we are seeing today
[Guest 1]: Has been speeded up in the last 4 years
[Guest 1]: But it's a long process of devaluing the idea of good journalism
[Amit Varma]: Peter, good time for me to turn to you
[Amit Varma]: Siddharth has sort of been talking about how through the 70s
[Amit Varma]: Until the 90s
[Amit Varma]: The incentives for journalists changed
[Amit Varma]: First of all the incentives changed
[Amit Varma]: Because they were no longer the
[Amit Varma]: Producing the main product
[Amit Varma]: Which was the journalism
[Amit Varma]: Which would you know attract readers to buy the newspaper
[Amit Varma]: But the readers were the product
[Amit Varma]: And they had to sort of you know
[Amit Varma]: Everything had to be therefore done at the behest of advertisers
[Amit Varma]: And so on
[Amit Varma]: And this process became exacerbated so to say
[Amit Varma]: When the business model changed
[Amit Varma]: Where instead of relying on subscriptions
[Amit Varma]: You start relying on advertising
[Amit Varma]: Because it's far more profitable
[Amit Varma]: Now as I was
[Amit Varma]: You know we were chatting earlier
[Amit Varma]: While we were on our way to the studio
[Amit Varma]: I consider you a bit of an anomaly
[Amit Varma]: Because even though you work as a senior editor
[Amit Varma]: In an old media organization
[Amit Varma]: I've always thought of you as someone
[Amit Varma]: Who is right at the cutting edge of new media
[Amit Varma]: You know I've known you from the time
[Amit Varma]: We were early bloggers
[Amit Varma]: And you did a lot of innovative stuff
[Amit Varma]: With new media such as
[Amit Varma]: You know crowdsourcing relief
[Amit Varma]: At the time of the cloudburst
[Amit Varma]: And later on the terrorist attacks in Mumbai
[Amit Varma]: And so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: So you've kind of seen
[Amit Varma]: The changing state of the media
[Amit Varma]: From up close
[Amit Varma]: When did you begin to feel
[Amit Varma]: That in some way
[Amit Varma]: Journalism and the media
[Amit Varma]: Were fundamentally changing
[Amit Varma]: Because of technology
[Guest 2]: So I think I saw these changes
[Guest 2]: Starting off in the 90s
[Guest 2]: Before journalism
[Guest 2]: Okay I was a journalist
[Guest 2]: First a cub in a magazine
[Guest 2]: Then I went off into advertising
[Guest 2]: And spent years there
[Guest 2]: Became a creative director
[Guest 2]: And then got disillusioned
[Guest 2]: But during that time
[Guest 2]: Is when I saw the first
[Guest 2]: Elements of technology changing
[Guest 2]: Where you know
[Guest 2]: I had to do the kind of things
[Guest 2]: Like we were doing the first
[Guest 2]: Digital artworks
[Guest 2]: My advertising career
[Guest 2]: Went through the age of manual artworks
[Guest 2]: Where you are assembling stuff
[Guest 2]: On pasteboard
[Guest 2]: To having fights with the studio
[Guest 2]: On saying that you could do digital
[Guest 2]: Far easier
[Guest 2]: And they were seeing
[Guest 2]: Unable to
[Guest 2]: I made presentations in the office
[Guest 2]: That said here is the price
[Guest 2]: Of an email account
[Guest 2]: Here is the cost
[Guest 2]: Of a peon
[Guest 2]: If you can ferry your artworks
[Guest 2]: Via email so to speak
[Guest 2]: You will be saving this much money
[Guest 2]: So I've come from that
[Guest 2]: So I've
[Guest 2]: So
[Guest 2]: It's a sort of long winded way
[Guest 2]: Of answering your question
[Guest 2]: Of seeing the media change
[Guest 2]: But I saw it from a different way
[Guest 2]: I saw it from
[Guest 2]: The enemy camp so to speak
[Guest 2]: From the advertising agency
[Guest 2]: Point of view
[Guest 2]: And
[Guest 2]: The big lessons
[Guest 2]: I took from advertising
[Guest 2]: Is that we realized
[Guest 2]: This is why I was fascinated
[Guest 2]: Listening to Siddharth all this time
[Guest 2]: We were the interruption
[Guest 2]: In advertising
[Guest 2]: They were consuming it
[Guest 2]: For the media
[Guest 2]: And we had to try
[Guest 2]: And make our way there
[Guest 2]: And be interesting
[Guest 2]: Because no one bought
[Guest 2]: A newspaper for the ads
[Guest 2]: At least that was my perception
[Guest 2]: Though I'm learning differently
[Guest 2]: From what you guys
[Guest 2]: Have been talking about right now
[Guest 2]: But
[Guest 2]: You know
[Guest 2]: No one put on the television
[Guest 2]: To watch ads
[Guest 2]: Except weirdos like me
[Guest 2]: Who were fascinated by advertising
[Guest 2]: And
[Guest 2]: Put on the television
[Guest 2]: Just before Ramayana
[Guest 2]: Because
[Guest 2]: That's when you saw
[Guest 2]: The biggest chunk of ads
[Guest 2]: All together
[Guest 2]: And you could see
[Guest 2]: Everything all together
[Guest 2]: That's what made me
[Guest 2]: Want to become a copywriter
[Guest 2]: But
[Guest 2]: I saw that change happening
[Guest 2]: As the internet came in
[Guest 2]: And technology came in
[Guest 2]: I would have had
[Guest 2]: A different perspective
[Guest 2]: On it I guess
[Guest 2]: If
[Guest 2]: I had been involved
[Guest 2]: More with print
[Guest 2]: At that time
[Guest 2]: Because
[Guest 2]: I was
[Guest 2]: Looking at it
[Guest 2]: From the advertiser side
[Guest 2]: And so I would not
[Guest 2]: Have seen or remarked
[Guest 2]: On the changes
[Guest 2]: That we were talking about
[Guest 2]: Because
[Guest 2]: We were at the other end of it
[Guest 2]: At that point
[Guest 2]: I started writing
[Guest 2]: In the press again
[Guest 2]: Freelance
[Guest 2]: A little bit here and there
[Guest 2]: In the mid 2000s
[Guest 2]: Mainly features
[Guest 2]: I've always been a features guy
[Guest 2]: Rather than a news guy
[Guest 2]: And
[Guest 2]: I saw the process
[Guest 2]: Of change happening
[Guest 2]: In multiple ways
[Guest 2]: In the way news
[Guest 2]: Was gathered
[Guest 2]: In the way you could
[Guest 2]: Produce news
[Guest 2]: All of that
[Guest 2]: I don't have much
[Guest 2]: Of a view
[Guest 2]: On
[Guest 2]: Ways to pay for it
[Guest 2]: And what it was
[Guest 2]: And how much
[Guest 2]: It was worth
[Guest 2]: And
[Guest 2]: What it was
[Guest 2]: And what it isn't
[Guest 2]: That was
[Guest 2]: Educative
[Guest 2]: In the sense
[Guest 2]: That you could have
[Guest 2]: Been making money
[Guest 2]: Purely off your
[Guest 2]: Subscribers
[Guest 2]: And it was purely
[Guest 2]: Because of the
[Guest 2]: Dropping of prices
[Guest 2]: To sort of
[Guest 2]: Kill the market
[Guest 2]: For your competitors
[Guest 2]: That caused the change
[Guest 2]: Was something that
[Guest 2]: Had not registered
[Guest 2]: On my head
[Guest 2]: So thank you for that
[Guest 2]: But
[Amit Varma]: I guess
[Amit Varma]: I mean going back
[Amit Varma]: For example
[Amit Varma]: I remember
[Amit Varma]: One of the
[Amit Varma]: Moments where we
[Amit Varma]: Also got to know
[Amit Varma]: Each other
[Amit Varma]: And we did
[Amit Varma]: A post of Tamil Nadu
[Unknown]: Basically live blogging it
[Amit Varma]: In a sense
[Amit Varma]: Which
[Amit Varma]: Sort of made my blog
[Amit Varma]: At the time
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut
[Amit Varma]: Just sort of
[Amit Varma]: Explored into
[Amit Varma]: Everyone's
[Amit Varma]: Consciousness
[Amit Varma]: And what you did
[Amit Varma]: At that time
[Amit Varma]: Was you put together
[Amit Varma]: A very interesting
[Amit Varma]: System
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if you
[Amit Varma]: Noticed what Peter
[Amit Varma]: Was doing in those days
[Amit Varma]: Which was that
[Amit Varma]: You collated
[Amit Varma]: SMS's from people
[Amit Varma]: All across the
[Guest 2]: Affected areas
[Guest 2]: And you put them
[Guest 2]: On one blog
[Guest 2]: So people could
[Guest 2]: Get real updates
[Guest 2]: And we came up
[Guest 2]: With those thoughts
[Guest 2]: On using
[Guest 2]: Text and what not
[Guest 2]: Is a chap called
[Guest 2]: Taran Ramprasad
[Guest 2]: From the
[Guest 2]: Trinidad and Tobago
[Unknown]: And
[Unknown]: As he has pointed
[Guest 2]: Out and others
[Guest 2]: Have pointed out
[Guest 2]: It was
[Guest 2]: Twitter
[Amit Varma]: Way before
[Unknown]: Twitter
[Guest 2]: Exactly
[Guest 2]: And I don't think
[Unknown]: He's got enough
[Guest 2]: Credit for that
[Guest 2]: But
[Guest 2]: So we did
[Guest 2]: A number of things
[Guest 2]: So like you
[Guest 2]: Were doing it
[Guest 2]: Using your blog
[Guest 2]: Using digital
[Amit Varma]: To do the
[Amit Varma]: Old fashioned
[Amit Varma]: Way
[Guest 2]: So you're not
[Guest 2]: Beholden to the
[Guest 2]: New cycle
[Guest 2]: Exactly
[Guest 2]: You were using
[Guest 2]: Digital
[Guest 2]: Which is
[Guest 2]: Now you were not
[Guest 2]: Bound by anything
[Unknown]: But you were
[Unknown]: Doing it the
[Guest 2]: Old fashioned
[Guest 2]: Way
[Guest 2]: Right
[Guest 2]: Your method
[Guest 2]: Of delivery
[Guest 2]: And your
[Guest 2]: Schedule
[Guest 2]: And everything
[Guest 2]: Was now
[Guest 2]: Wide open
[Guest 2]: Exactly
[Guest 2]: What we were
[Guest 2]: Doing was
[Guest 2]: So the SMS's
[Guest 2]: And all that
[Guest 2]: Were part of it
[Guest 2]: We were
[Guest 2]: Putting together
[Guest 2]: That information
[Guest 2]: In a way that
[Guest 2]: Could be useful
[Guest 2]: For
[Guest 2]: There was a
[Guest 2]: Surge of
[Guest 2]: Goodwill
[Guest 2]: People wanted
[Guest 2]: To help
[Guest 2]: We were able
[Guest 2]: To channel that
[Guest 2]: We were relying
[Guest 2]: On stuff
[Guest 2]: That you know
[Guest 2]: People like you
[Guest 2]: Did
[Guest 2]: Who went out
[Guest 2]: There and
[Guest 2]: Talked
[Guest 2]: We had
[Guest 2]: This diverse
[Guest 2]: Set of networks
[Guest 2]: People in the
[Guest 2]: NGO world
[Guest 2]: People who
[Guest 2]: Were journalists
[Guest 2]: Feeding us
[Guest 2]: The kind of
[Guest 2]: Task we did
[Guest 2]: Was not
[Guest 2]: Available
[Guest 2]: To be able
[Guest 2]: To do that
[Guest 2]: In real time
[Guest 2]: Before
[Guest 2]: And we became
[Guest 2]: An aggregator
[Guest 2]: Of a variety
[Guest 2]: Of other things
[Guest 2]: And became a
[Guest 2]: Channel
[Guest 2]: In that sense
[Guest 2]: So that
[Guest 2]: In a way
[Guest 2]: Also
[Guest 2]: I remember
[Guest 2]: Ashok Malik
[Guest 2]: Talking about it
[Guest 2]: Where he said
[Guest 2]: That this was
[Guest 2]: A case of
[Guest 2]: Actually an
[Guest 2]: Innovation
[Guest 2]: Here
[Guest 2]: That had
[Guest 2]: Then been
[Guest 2]: Deployed
[Guest 2]: By
[Guest 2]: One of
[Guest 2]: Our collaborators
[Guest 2]: From the
[Guest 2]: Tsunami blog
[Guest 2]: Sitting here
[Guest 2]: In Bombay
[Guest 2]: Another one
[Guest 2]: Who was in
[Guest 2]: Kuwait
[Guest 2]: At that point
[Guest 2]: And another
[Guest 2]: Woman in
[Guest 2]: London
[Guest 2]: Were operating
[Guest 2]: A call centre
[Guest 2]: For people
[Guest 2]: Seeking help
[Guest 2]: In Houston
[Guest 2]: Using a
[Guest 2]: Free Skype
[Guest 2]: Number
[Guest 2]: And so on
[Guest 2]: And so forth
[Guest 2]: So I'm saying
[Guest 2]: The technology
[Guest 2]: Kept widening
[Guest 2]: Out
[Guest 2]: It didn't have
[Guest 2]: To be a diary
[Guest 2]: It can do
[Guest 2]: X, Y, Z
[Guest 2]: Things
[Guest 2]: And you were
[Guest 2]: Repurposing
[Guest 2]: As you went along
[Amit Varma]: And what was
[Amit Varma]: Exciting about
[Amit Varma]: Those times
[Amit Varma]: Was that
[Amit Varma]: Suddenly the means
[Amit Varma]: Of production
[Amit Varma]: Was open to everyone
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely
[Amit Varma]: And it was
[Amit Varma]: At times like this
[Amit Varma]: Where you know
[Amit Varma]: You're not relying
[Amit Varma]: On mainstream media
[Amit Varma]: You're getting
[Amit Varma]: Important information
[Amit Varma]: Out there in real time
[Amit Varma]: There are people
[Unknown]: Curating it for you
[Amit Varma]: And even as
[Amit Varma]: A regular blogger
[Amit Varma]: During those times
[Amit Varma]: There'll be
[Amit Varma]: A lot of good content
[Amit Varma]: A lot of bad content
[Amit Varma]: But you let
[Amit Varma]: The people figure it out
[Amit Varma]: You let the markets
[Amit Varma]: Operate
[Amit Varma]: That's fine you know
[Amit Varma]: Everything will
[Amit Varma]: Find its niche
[Amit Varma]: And it was
[Amit Varma]: Tremendously exciting
[Amit Varma]: And at that time
[Amit Varma]: There seemed
[Amit Varma]: There's no real
[Amit Varma]: Downside to this
[Amit Varma]: But then
[Amit Varma]: What started
[Amit Varma]: Happening was
[Amit Varma]: And I still
[Amit Varma]: Maintain all of this
[Amit Varma]: As a net positive
[Amit Varma]: And thank god
[Amit Varma]: For this technology
[Amit Varma]: But then
[Amit Varma]: What started
[Amit Varma]: Happening was
[Amit Varma]: That this
[Amit Varma]: Was not
[Amit Varma]: The one place
[Amit Varma]: That people
[Amit Varma]: Go to for their news
[Amit Varma]: And for their views
[Amit Varma]: Of the world
[Amit Varma]: And instead
[Amit Varma]: They can pretty much
[Amit Varma]: Find something
[Amit Varma]: That caters to
[Amit Varma]: However they want
[Amit Varma]: To see the world
[Amit Varma]: They can form
[Amit Varma]: Their own echo chambers
[Amit Varma]: They can live
[Amit Varma]: In their own
[Amit Varma]: Little constructed
[Amit Varma]: Separated worlds
[Amit Varma]: And what you see
[Amit Varma]: Today is sort of
[Amit Varma]: An extreme version
[Amit Varma]: Of that
[Amit Varma]: Where you know
[Amit Varma]: So many people
[Amit Varma]: Who get their news
[Amit Varma]: From whatsapp forwards
[Amit Varma]: And you know
[Amit Varma]: We are inundated
[Amit Varma]: In an age
[Amit Varma]: Where there seems
[Amit Varma]: No way around it
[Amit Varma]: Because this is
[Amit Varma]: You know
[Amit Varma]: All of this content
[Amit Varma]: Is put out
[Amit Varma]: Freely
[Amit Varma]: By people
[Amit Varma]: Expressing themselves
[Amit Varma]: And you don't
[Amit Varma]: Want to fight
[Amit Varma]: Their free expression
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time
[Amit Varma]: There is an organic
[Amit Varma]: Market for it
[Amit Varma]: Which is saying
[Amit Varma]: That we don't
[Amit Varma]: Give a damn
[Amit Varma]: About what you
[Amit Varma]: Think the facts
[Amit Varma]: Might be
[Amit Varma]: This is what
[Guest 1]: We want to believe
[Guest 1]: How do we
[Guest 1]: Get past this
[Guest 1]: So a lot of
[Guest 1]: Interesting stuff
[Guest 1]: Here
[Guest 1]: Especially
[Guest 1]: In terms of
[Guest 1]: Leveraging
[Guest 1]: Digital
[Guest 1]: And the one
[Guest 1]: Big take away
[Guest 1]: From many
[Guest 1]: Of the things
[Guest 1]: You said
[Guest 1]: Was that
[Guest 1]: Means of production
[Guest 1]: Now are a little
[Guest 1]: Democratic
[Guest 1]: Democratized
[Guest 1]: And it is a
[Guest 1]: Net positive
[Guest 1]: Because I am now
[Guest 1]: Increasingly finding
[Guest 1]: Out that
[Guest 1]: Twitter for example
[Guest 1]: What we call
[Guest 1]: Twitter
[Guest 1]: But the
[Guest 1]: Twitterverse
[Guest 1]: That whole
[Guest 1]: Is a far
[Guest 1]: More
[Guest 1]: Independent
[Guest 1]: Voice
[Guest 1]: Collectively
[Guest 1]: Than
[Guest 1]: The
[Guest 1]: Mainstream
[Guest 1]: Media
[Guest 1]: And in
[Guest 1]: India
[Guest 1]: I can say
[Guest 1]: This with some
[Guest 1]: Confidence
[Guest 1]: That the
[Guest 1]: Mainstream
[Guest 1]: Media
[Guest 1]: Is
[Guest 1]: Breathing
[Guest 1]: Its last
[Guest 1]: If they go
[Guest 1]: On like this
[Guest 1]: So let's
[Guest 1]: I want to
[Guest 1]: Stick to this
[Guest 1]: Point for a
[Guest 1]: Minute
[Guest 1]: For example
[Guest 1]: TV in India
[Guest 1]: Is dead
[Guest 1]: News TV
[Guest 1]: In India
[Guest 1]: Is dead
[Guest 1]: Because
[Guest 1]: People
[Guest 1]: Also
[Guest 1]: Regard
[Guest 1]: Tell
[Guest 1]: To
[Guest 1]: People
[Guest 1]: Like
[Guest 1]: Truth
[Guest 1]: So
[Guest 1]: This
[Guest 1]: Is the
[Guest 1]: Big
[Guest 1]: Mass
[Guest 1]: News
[Guest 1]: That
[Guest 1]: There
[Guest 1]: Is
[Guest 1]: Coming
[Guest 1]: For
[Guest 1]: The
[Guest 1]: First
[Guest 1]: Time
[Guest 1]: Twitter
[Guest 1]: So
[Guest 1]: ISH
[Guest 1]: Block
[Guest 1]: So
[Guest 1]: Anybody who follows any of these noisy channels want their son to become that.
[Guest 1]: And say, when you grow up, I want you to become this.
[Amit Varma]: I think there are more and more children nowadays being named Arnab.
[Amit Varma]: I think that would be an aspiration for a lot of people.
[Guest 1]: My point is, everyone has an instinctive understanding.
[Guest 1]: But this formula, and Fox TV in India, in the US has been successful for a long time.
[Guest 1]: But this formula has a self-limiting.
[Amit Varma]: But when you say news TV is dead, if I may ask you to elaborate and we can stick on this
[Unknown]: point, the numbers.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: So you're not saying from a point of view of some journalistic ideal, but commercially
[Guest 1]: they are dead.
[Guest 1]: Yes.
[Guest 1]: Because look at the investment you're putting in a simple channel with, you know, bureaus
[Guest 1]: and equipment, equipment is getting miniaturized, but people have not switched to it yet in
[Guest 1]: a big way.
[Guest 1]: You still have to pay satellite fees, right?
[Amit Varma]: You still have to pay the cablewala in this country.
[Amit Varma]: And is the result in polarization a result of that because it's a race to the bottom
[Guest 1]: now?
[Guest 1]: Yes, of course.
[Guest 1]: It's a race to get eyeballs.
[Guest 1]: Look, I don't want to go into deep detail about it.
[Guest 1]: But if you were to do even a cursory research, the set-top boxes are more in Ahmedabad than
[Guest 1]: in the entire Northeast.
[Guest 1]: Where are you going to pitch your argument to?
[Guest 1]: You're not interested in the Northeast, firstly, getting people there, secondly, getting people
[Guest 1]: all excited.
[Guest 1]: Thirdly, what will the advertisers say?
[Guest 1]: So if it's skewed like this, commercially, you're already geared your model around that.
[Guest 1]: Then you have set up 200 crores to set it up while there are 437 other news channels.
[Guest 1]: So you've got your small universe and maybe you're making money.
[Guest 1]: How long?
[Guest 1]: Government changes.
[Guest 1]: Are you going to change?
[Guest 1]: Are you still going to be in the same mode?
[Guest 1]: All those journalistic factors will feed into the larger economic reality.
[Guest 1]: It's about economic.
[Guest 1]: The larger publications are thriving, doing very well.
[Guest 1]: Literacy is growing up, increasing.
[Guest 1]: The newspapers themselves have solid revenues and they have not totally sold themselves
[Guest 1]: down the river.
[Guest 1]: You can still read a newspaper.
[Guest 1]: But worldwide, the bigger newspapers, so many have shut down.
[Guest 1]: So as this kind of digital world and technology world, I'm a dinosaur.
[Guest 1]: But the person who's now 28 already consuming in quotes, the news from those kind of sources
[Guest 1]: is reading everything on mobile.
[Guest 1]: I don't think anyone gets five newspapers at home.
[Guest 1]: I still do.
[Guest 1]: But they are not going to.
[Amit Varma]: So your sense is eventually as this trend grows, even the Times of India, Hindustan
[Guest 1]: Times, the Hindu there.
[Guest 1]: In the long run, they will have to either adapt, perhaps have a smaller circulation
[Guest 1]: up their journalism game, maybe open new bureau, consolidate.
[Guest 1]: Many papers will come together.
[Guest 1]: 2005, when I came back to India after living abroad for a while, five newspapers started
[Guest 1]: in this city within six months.
[Guest 1]: DNA, Mirror, Hindustan Times, Mint, and one more.
[Amit Varma]: I remember.
[Amit Varma]: DNA, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: DNA's budget in those days, marketing budget.
[Guest 1]: You remember those ads?
[Guest 1]: Was humongous.
[Guest 1]: Hindu was coming into Bombay, etc.
[Guest 1]: So the Mirror was the Times reaction.
[Guest 1]: Now, those ideas are gone, journalists are losing jobs, newsrooms are tiny.
[Guest 1]: So it's going to have a commercial impact.
[Guest 1]: It's a myth to think that setting up a digital site is actually quite a, you know, modest
[Guest 1]: investment.
[Guest 1]: It is not.
[Guest 1]: Because even with those modest investments, you still have to invest in people.
[Guest 1]: And people are very, very expensive.
[Guest 1]: Newsgathering is very, very expensive.
[Guest 1]: But it allows us to be nimble.
[Guest 1]: Sharing is the name of the game.
[Guest 1]: Some freelancer from somewhere will pop up high quality and deliver.
[Guest 1]: A lot of journalists are getting fed up.
[Guest 1]: I want Middle East coverage.
[Guest 1]: I have a Middle East site whom I have never met in my life.
[Guest 1]: I shake hands across the digital world.
[Guest 1]: They say take our stories.
[Guest 1]: So my coverage is going to get beefed up.
[Guest 1]: So that's going to happen.
[Guest 1]: Nimbleness.
[Guest 1]: Television, the first few companies, NDTV, etc., were nimble operations started by independent.
[Guest 1]: They didn't come from Times of India.
[Guest 1]: The Times of India's first foray into television was a flop.
[Guest 1]: Hindustan Times had Home TV.
[Guest 1]: It was a flop.
[Guest 1]: You guys had something in the Hindu, you know, but Raghav came out of nowhere and started
[Guest 1]: this.
[Guest 1]: You know, he's an accountant.
[Guest 1]: And the same thing is happening with digital.
[Guest 1]: So what at the moment we are doing and several others are doing is bringing strong journalism
[Guest 1]: values.
[Guest 1]: You were talking about how you live blog.
[Guest 1]: You may be in a responsible person, but filtration is critical.
[Guest 1]: The processes because there are several fake news while I will tell you, not a single Christian
[Guest 1]: has died in this because Christian missionaries are paying for their Keralite happened.
[Guest 1]: I think people want to read.
[Guest 1]: They love the taste of chutney and they want that chutney, but they can't live on it.
[Guest 1]: So hygiene, news hygiene, nutrition, etc., will have to come in the game.
[Guest 1]: And some will start, some will die.
[Guest 1]: We also lead a very financially precarious existence and all that journalism will thrive,
[Guest 1]: whether it's a blogger bringing news and facts.
[Guest 1]: As you said, we were aggregating just simple facts of what was happening and people's appeals.
[Guest 1]: Now Twitter does it.
[Guest 1]: You can do it via Twitter and Facebook and several other platforms.
[Guest 1]: But media is an extremely dynamic situation at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: On that wonderfully hopeful note, we'll take a commercial break with the promise that we'll
[Amit Varma]: come back to discuss darker matters.
[Unknown]: So it's been another great week on IVM podcast, just like it is every week.
[Unknown]: You know, if you aren't following us on social media, you should wear IVM podcast on Twitter,
[Unknown]: Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Send us a message, send us a comment, you know, let us know what you think about the
[Unknown]: stuff that we're doing and the stuff that you're listening to.
[Unknown]: This week on Cyrus says Cyrus is joined by writer Rishali Talam.
[Unknown]: She speaks about jumping from TV to books and her memories of producing MTV Loveline.
[Unknown]: On the scene and the unseen, Amit is joined by founder editor of The Wire, Siddharth Bhatia
[Unknown]: and senior editor of The Hindu, Peter Griffin.
[Unknown]: They discuss the current state of Indian media and the role of journalists today.
[Unknown]: This week, Indranil Guha, co-founder of Finpeg, talks to Anupaman Pasa Vesa about Alpha SIPs.
[Unknown]: Last week on Know Your Kanun, lawyer and host Ambarana took us through the history and scope
[Unknown]: of Section 497 and the time when adultery was first recognized as an offense.
[Unknown]: On the Kinetic Living podcast, Urmi spoke to IVM's co-founder, Kavita Rajwade, about
[Unknown]: her love for functional training, food and the morning workout routine that she strictly
[Unknown]: follows.
[Unknown]: And again, guys, I just really want to remind you, you know, I mean, like the best way to
[Unknown]: spread the word about podcasting is you, you're our ambassadors.
[Unknown]: Please go out and tell a friend, ask them to listen to something that you have enjoyed
[Unknown]: and that you think that they would enjoy as well.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's move on with the show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Siddharth Bhatia and Peter Griffin.
[Amit Varma]: So Siddharth, when we were on the break, you were just talking about how you love Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: But isn't Twitter also a reflection with what's happening in the media to our discourse in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that it's incredibly polarized.
[Amit Varma]: What I find on Twitter is that everything has become shrill.
[Amit Varma]: All discourse has become personalized, where people don't talk to each other, they talk
[Amit Varma]: past each other.
[Amit Varma]: And often they are, you know, virtue signaling in different ways to lift their status within
[Amit Varma]: their own in group.
[Amit Varma]: And dialogue is almost impossible.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so it's not a dialogue platform, let's be honest, nor was a typical newspaper, it
[Guest 1]: was not a dialogue.
[Guest 1]: Because I am a great admirer of the newspaper model.
[Guest 1]: So when people rubbish it to say, oh, who are these editors on high?
[Guest 1]: The editors on high are people with great amount of qualifications.
[Guest 1]: They have studied the subject or they expected to have studied the subject.
[Guest 1]: Even what they write, forget the reporter, passes through three layers, news editor can
[Guest 1]: look at it and fact check and it comes out after a 24 hour cycle.
[Guest 1]: So that thing that you say, but there is a, you know, I will not name this person, a very
[Guest 1]: smart alecky media commentator, stroke, you know, he writes and talks about the media
[Guest 1]: all over the place, very hip, very, this one said I was at some meeting to audience of
[Guest 1]: students that the day of the editorial is over, editorial comment, because who are these
[Guest 1]: bunch of old farts trying to tell you what you should think?
[Guest 1]: And you know, I can kind of break it down and rubbish it.
[Guest 1]: But basically, what I'm trying to say, filtration in a newspaper is critical, but it was not
[Guest 1]: a dialogue.
[Guest 1]: Letters to the editor and which got cut.
[Guest 1]: And very few people, papers really give it much thought was no dialogue.
[Guest 1]: You didn't like a piece, you lumped it, Twitter has no dialogue.
[Guest 1]: But there is a chance that somebody will respond, there is that small band and world of people
[Guest 1]: who will talk to you, engage with you.
[Amit Varma]: I don't engage with anybody who trolls me at all.
[Amit Varma]: I block if I don't block 10 people a day, I feel like there's something.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So you've got your mosquito swatter with you and you're sorting and that gives you great
[Guest 1]: joy.
[Guest 1]: I stopped blocking.
[Guest 1]: The other day, I met somebody and said, Well, you blocked me and I've known him for about
[Guest 1]: 30 years, and I had blocked him.
[Guest 1]: But socially, I was a bit embarrassed.
[Guest 1]: And I said, Did I?
[Amit Varma]: I thought I muted you.
[Amit Varma]: And he's listening to this.
[Guest 1]: So sure, there are those.
[Guest 1]: But I welcome criticism.
[Guest 1]: There have been times when mistakes have been pointed out.
[Guest 1]: I welcome that people have said, Hey, I can't read your website.
[Guest 1]: I welcome that people have said, you know, why are you biased in the favor of x or against
[Guest 1]: y, if it looks like an intelligent person, the profile says, you know, reasonably sensible
[Guest 1]: followed by PM Modi.
[Guest 1]: That also I will, perhaps if this comment is sensible, but if she or he is a coffee
[Guest 1]: snob out, I don't do coffee snobs, a lot of coffee snobs on their Twitter, but I do respond.
[Guest 1]: I engage, I listen, that's my feedback. And what I also like to tell myself, I must respect
[Guest 1]: my Twitter followers, and our readers, I owe it to them.
[Guest 1]: I'm not talking down.
[Amit Varma]: I am sharing I like to think and what you talk about, you know, the importance of the
[Amit Varma]: editor and being a filter for content.
[Amit Varma]: If you think about it in one way, all of us are our own filters.
[Amit Varma]: That's what we use social media for, like what you will find on my Twitter feed will
[Amit Varma]: be quite different from what is on yours or on Peter's because we've all already been
[Guest 1]: our own.
[Guest 1]: I can follow everybody and get a variety of views.
[Guest 1]: I'm not saying send me this thing every morning, which only there are people who subscribe
[Guest 1]: to let's say us, but they would subscribe to something that's on not us, except that
[Guest 1]: subscribing to a rabidly right wing, lying website, fill in the blanks, yeah.
[Guest 1]: Because I know you have a huge audience.
[Guest 1]: So I don't want to get into legal issues, you're welcome to say whatever the hell you
[Guest 1]: want.
[Guest 1]: But that is not the counter to that is not the wire is not that the counter to the wire
[Guest 1]: is to say, look, I like you, but I think your views are too extreme, or too not to my liking.
[Amit Varma]: I will read something that balances.
[Amit Varma]: So here's whatever it may be, here's a subject I want to explore.
[Amit Varma]: How do you make money?
[Amit Varma]: How does journalism today make money?
[Amit Varma]: Is the wire profitable, if I may ask?
[Guest 1]: Or is there a path to profitability?
[Guest 1]: So we there is no question of profitability, because we are donation led, right?
[Guest 1]: We are not for profit.
[Guest 1]: We began with three of us putting in I say this, we had a lot of things lacking, we are
[Guest 1]: just three lakhs.
[Guest 1]: That's all one lakh, one lakh, one lakh, that's all.
[Guest 1]: And for months, we never took a salary, we worked out of each other's homes.
[Guest 1]: When I went to Delhi, I stayed with my friends, they came down, they stayed with me.
[Guest 1]: That's how we managed.
[Guest 1]: Some old karma must have played a role because for about 10 months, or 12 months, we never
[Guest 1]: paid people.
[Guest 1]: And now we do but because we just called in favor left, right and center, halfway through,
[Guest 1]: people realize this was a platform worth writing on.
[Guest 1]: So more people started writing.
[Guest 1]: After about eight months, a high net worth individual came to us and says, I'd like to
[Guest 1]: give you some money.
[Guest 1]: He was turned out to be super generous gave us 50 lakhs.
[Guest 1]: And since then, we've got money from foundations from grants.
[Guest 1]: And now of course, we have a very active online donation program.
[Amit Varma]: So there's no question of profit, but we are always short of what we want.
[Amit Varma]: But here's my thing, you know, what you just said, both gives me great hope and also great
[Amit Varma]: despair, great hope, because it's wonderful to know that there are people for whom journalism
[Amit Varma]: is a labor of love, and they will do it no matter what.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, they will fight the odds to do it like you guys started from your homes.
[Amit Varma]: But it also gives me despair that one has to depend on the passion of individuals and
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, the magnanimity of philanthropists here and there, and the common donor, rather
[Amit Varma]: than actually be able to make money from it.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes me very sad.
[Amit Varma]: And my question here, Peter is, and we were discussing this earlier, is that, look, I
[Amit Varma]: think everyone who reads Viyar or who reads Kroll, another excellent magazine, or Pragati
[Amit Varma]: Mayur magazine, everyone who reads any of these publications is paying for it, they're
[Amit Varma]: paying for it, because they're spending a certain amount of time on it.
[Amit Varma]: Time is money, there's opportunity cost, except there's no way for the publisher to capture
[Amit Varma]: that value.
[Amit Varma]: Now, earlier, the old school value was you bring out a newspaper, readers read it, you
[Amit Varma]: capture that through advertising, that is clearly not working.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've worked with Network 18 for many years, and now with The Hindu, advertising
[Amit Varma]: no longer is enough to make money of digital media, subscriptions, really, I believe the
[Amit Varma]: Ken is doing very well and more power to them, but haven't really taken off to that extent.
[Amit Varma]: How do you make money with journalism is my question to both of you.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so, you know, it wasn't just the subscription price that killed that caused the introduction
[Guest 2]: price that caused problems.
[Guest 2]: What came up was that no one, I think, from the beginning, learned how to deal with the
[Guest 2]: internet.
[Guest 2]: Because even if you're paying two bucks for your newspaper, and I could get the same thing
[Guest 2]: online for free, paying the cost of my internet subscription, which was pretty high at that
[Guest 2]: point, you know, prices have dropped there.
[Guest 2]: But we got accustomed all over the world, for the internet to give us stuff for free.
[Guest 2]: And if the internet didn't give us stuff for free, if somebody tried to, you know, charge
[Guest 2]: you money for it, there were others were giving it free.
[Guest 2]: So in a similar way that you couldn't combat the two rupee invitation price, and keep your
[Guest 2]: money because the moment someone else succumbs, you have alternatives who are giving you,
[Guest 2]: you know, your news at lower rates, then the guy who's charging higher will say okay, fine,
[Guest 2]: we don't, even though that's, you know, a trivial amount, it's the cost of a Vodapower
[Guest 2]: at that point, or whatever it is, you would still go to the cheaper alternative.
[Guest 2]: Now, the problem is, I don't think any of us in the traditional media have really learned
[Guest 2]: how to, or what we think enough about the internet.
[Guest 2]: I think that in India, we have had a bit of a cushion.
[Guest 2]: In the more developed parts of the world, newspapers closing down, shutting shop, slashing
[Guest 2]: the sizes of their newsrooms and all of that.
[Guest 2]: In India, we have a few fortunate things happening.
[Guest 2]: One is that we're still a poor country, we're still a country with a large amount of a large
[Guest 2]: gap in literacy.
[Guest 2]: There are new literates coming in every day.
[Guest 2]: We're not a mature market in that sense, right?
[Guest 2]: So when new people are coming in every day, they want something to consume, in terms they
[Guest 2]: want information, they want to be able to read it.
[Guest 2]: And so we have growth, it has given us the illusion that the media is continuing to grow.
[Guest 2]: Because there are new people coming in.
[Guest 2]: And when you come in newly to literacy, you're not going straight to literature, right?
[Guest 2]: You look at functional information first, where do I get what is the price of X?
[Guest 2]: So where do I get good sales for, you know, find my markets for my produce, find out the
[Guest 2]: basic information and then the media delivers that.
[Guest 2]: But we have, we could have been using this time, I think, broadly in the Indian media
[Guest 2]: to figure out how to find paying models.
[Guest 2]: Whether it is as Siddharth was talking about, where you've decided that your funding is
[Guest 2]: going to come from philanthropists and donors, or the Ken model, which is entirely subscription
[Guest 2]: based or the hybrid models or some other stuff we haven't thought of yet.
[Guest 2]: How are you going to deliver that content?
[Guest 2]: We should have been having these conversations and been thinking about it for years now.
[Guest 2]: We haven't because we've been growing in smaller and smaller, you know, jumps, but we've been
[Guest 2]: still continuing to grow.
[Guest 2]: The fragmentation that we were talking about, all the other stuff that comes in, you know,
[Guest 2]: just one little point out there, we're talking about Twitter and everything and the things
[Guest 2]: that all the Twitter and early blogs and everything, all the big accounts, mainstream media noticed
[Guest 2]: them, gave them that and, you know, your credibility came from having been written about the Tsunami
[Guest 2]: Help blog came, got credibility from being featured in XYZ and then the New York Times
[Guest 2]: picking it up and then suddenly we were world famous for like five days, all of that stuff.
[Guest 2]: There's still a huge amount of power in the media is what that tells me.
[Guest 2]: Things are being discussed in opposition to the media, but you're still opposing that
[Guest 2]: thing that's there.
[Guest 2]: It's still important enough to oppose.
[Guest 2]: So that gives me in a strange kind of way, hope that enough people take enough time to
[Guest 2]: combat and debunk or fight against what they see as the oppression.
[Amit Varma]: And some value in it.
[Amit Varma]: That's the more important.
[Guest 2]: It's because they see value in it that they think it's important enough to counter.
[Guest 2]: Now, even the ones who are saying this is all bloody fake news are still taking the
[Guest 2]: trouble to say that it is fake news.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: It's worth attention.
[Guest 2]: And that in a strange way actually gives me hope that you still think it's important enough
[Guest 2]: to fight that the old fashioned battles are still being fought in new media kind of ways
[Guest 2]: that someone with the solid credentials of Siddharth and the team out there are still
[Guest 2]: out there being able to deliver this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: This does give me hope, but I'll tell you where the gap is and what the dilemma is.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say that it gives both of us hope that someone like Pratik Sinha of Alt News is doing
[Amit Varma]: what he's doing.
[Amit Varma]: It's just magnificent, which is basically debunking fake news all the time.
[Amit Varma]: It also gives me great hope that he has so many followers and Alt News has so many readers.
[Amit Varma]: What worries me is that they are not supremely profitable.
[Amit Varma]: That is sort of where the gap is.
[Amit Varma]: And I understand that some of it is because of inertia in our mindsets like the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of newspapers sell simply because I'm used to the daily newspaper coming to my house
[Amit Varma]: and I just don't cancel.
[Guest 1]: Also, they also sell because advertising in newspaper is also information.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: It's very important to understand.
[Guest 1]: But do people buy newspapers for advertising?
[Guest 1]: 40% of a newspaper buyer is because of classifieds, even today, because we don't have Craigslist.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: But a lot of people still want to buy and sell cars via that rather than the digital
[Guest 1]: world.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, large advertising display is also this read by a lot of people.
[Guest 1]: So advertising is a critical part of the information package, which is really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Those are the two kinds of inertia I was mentioning.
[Amit Varma]: One is that people who wouldn't otherwise read newspapers still pay for them in one
[Amit Varma]: way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And the other one is that in the early days of the internet, no one wanted to pay for
[Amit Varma]: anything even we didn't.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the reason is a friction in payment, who's going to give you a credit card detail?
[Amit Varma]: How do you make micropayments happen?
[Amit Varma]: Most of that friction has actually gone away now.
[Amit Varma]: And you can set up systems to do it really easily.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, that model hasn't really taken off.
[Guest 1]: No.
[Guest 1]: So I think part of your answer is in your question.
[Guest 1]: And that is that I can point out several things today which were unheard of and, you know,
[Guest 1]: people are skeptical about.
[Guest 1]: A lot of newspapers, even in India, are now selling their archives.
[Guest 1]: You have to subscribe for the archives.
[Guest 1]: I think your own newspaper, The Hindu, after seven days, you need to pay to read anything
[Guest 1]: before seven days, if I'm not mistaken, or register at least.
[Guest 1]: Payment is going to come.
[Guest 1]: You can't read the Economic Political Weekly.
[Guest 1]: A lot of people want to read it.
[Guest 1]: You have to subscribe for the online version.
[Guest 1]: So everyone said nobody pays.
[Guest 1]: The New York Times had a huge flop when they tried to introduce payment in the early days.
[Guest 1]: Then they said, OK, columnist is payment, the rest is free.
[Guest 1]: Now only three articles or five articles or whatever.
[Guest 1]: And all the legacy brands around the world in every country, whether it's, you know,
[Guest 1]: Spiegel, or whether it is Le Monde, or whether it's The Economist, The Times, in London,
[Guest 1]: The Guardian, not.
[Guest 1]: But everywhere else, you've got to pay.
[Guest 1]: Business Standard is trying it here.
[Guest 1]: I don't know how successful they are.
[Guest 1]: But then Business Standard's own columnists post their articles on their blog.
[Guest 1]: So you are getting something.
[Guest 1]: But it's going to change.
[Guest 1]: It's going to definitely change.
[Guest 1]: Who thought donor-led news media would take off?
[Guest 1]: Now there are, as you said, hybrid model.
[Guest 1]: There are at least two or three people who said they call it subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: So can we see the day when The Wire and Alt News are hugely successful by themselves and
[Guest 1]: don't need donors?
[Guest 1]: So the model for hugely successful is, you know, flexible.
[Guest 1]: I would say we are not going to become a 5,000 crore company anytime soon.
[Guest 1]: But if I can get, say, 35% of that influence, 50% of that influence, and a piece in The
[Guest 1]: Wire gets the attention of policymakers, I think we've got it.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, I would love to make 5,000 crores and probably will put 4,999 crores into news
[Guest 1]: gathering.
[Guest 1]: As a promoter, I don't get anything.
[Guest 1]: My salary is low and my dividends zero.
[Guest 1]: So there's no money for me.
[Guest 1]: But I would love to do it.
[Guest 1]: Who would have thought that Vinod Dua, long forgotten, resurrected by us, in the sense
[Guest 1]: that mainstream channels wouldn't touch him, would have a confirmed subscriber base on
[Guest 1]: YouTube of 700,000.
[Guest 1]: And that's a remarkable show.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: 700,000 is our YouTube channel.
[Guest 1]: We are people who know nothing about that world.
[Amit Varma]: Does he make a lot of money?
[Amit Varma]: Does he monetize that?
[Guest 1]: Of course not.
[Guest 1]: We get advertising.
[Guest 1]: Yes.
[Guest 1]: YouTube gives us advertising.
[Guest 1]: YouTube does.
[Guest 1]: It's very easy to become a YouTube one put advertising.
[Guest 1]: I mean, they're very, very cooperative.
[Guest 1]: But we don't have an ad manager.
[Guest 1]: And we don't have a show sponsor on our channel.
[Guest 1]: And that's because we can't afford an advertising manager.
[Guest 1]: But tomorrow when we can afford an ad manager, that person will get sponsorships for that.
[Guest 1]: I'll give you another tiny example.
[Guest 1]: You know, these summits held by newspapers and all that kind of thing, right?
[Guest 1]: And there are a lot of these award shows, cocktail parties, promotions, brand promotions,
[Guest 1]: all kinds of innovative names.
[Guest 1]: I think almost all maybe barring a few here and there are free events, right?
[Guest 1]: Of course, there are tickets for certain shows, certain summits and all that.
[Guest 1]: We've been holding small ticketed events, small.
[Guest 1]: Arun Chori talks to Karan Thapar, 800-700 people, tickets sold at something like the
[Guest 1]: first five rows or something 2000 rupees.
[Guest 1]: We made money on it.
[Guest 1]: Who would have thought, Arun Chori in Delhi, you know, so these are tiny drops in the ocean,
[Guest 1]: but things do change.
[Guest 1]: You know, there are websites which are trying the subscription model, they may not succeed
[Guest 1]: today.
[Guest 1]: They may tomorrow, some are trying the embedded advertising model, some are getting so things
[Amit Varma]: are changing definitely.
[Amit Varma]: We are innovative enough, we'll figure it out.
[Amit Varma]: All this will work.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, let's move on to from the commerce to let me ask you guys about the
[Amit Varma]: media climate in India, given what's happening politically, given that there is this interplay
[Amit Varma]: between money and power, that does affect the way the mainstream media reports on things.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you pointed out earlier that Jay Shah's case on the wire was not reported
[Amit Varma]: by any of the mainstream.
[Guest 1]: No, it was reported the next day, but the emphasis was on the case that he was to file
[Amit Varma]: on Monday morning.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And no one called you for a comment?
[Guest 1]: I don't think anyone called and used a comment in any substantive way.
[Guest 1]: And I also, I mean, you know, others may have got private phone calls, I did not get a single
[Guest 1]: call of solidarity.
[Guest 1]: And I've been in the business for a while.
[Guest 1]: So the big newspapers reported it.
[Guest 1]: And you've seen with Rafal, right, right.
[Guest 1]: Olan contradicts Mr. Modi's statement is the headline, obvious headline, it should be.
[Guest 1]: And it says that it sparks off a, you know, crossfire, a political crossfire in India.
[Amit Varma]: That's hardly the news.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was shocked to see one of the headlines in one of the mainstream newspapers, I won't
[Amit Varma]: take the name.
[Amit Varma]: But we are recording this, by the way, on September 24.
[Amit Varma]: So it'll come out a bit later.
[Amit Varma]: But it's in the context of what's going on now, I'm just letting the listeners know.
[Amit Varma]: And does this worry you?
[Guest 1]: Yes, of course, it worries me.
[Guest 1]: I'm a practicing professional journalist.
[Guest 1]: I think my duty is to my readers all the time.
[Guest 1]: You know, this sounds like a grand mission statement, but it's there embedded in my.
[Guest 1]: So of course, it worries me that the media state in India at the moment.
[Guest 1]: As I said, I'm a professional journalist.
[Guest 1]: I think of my reader, I'm not constantly motivated by what the reader may feel.
[Guest 1]: I don't want to be second guess, or second guess that reader of mine.
[Guest 1]: I think she's intelligent, articulate.
[Guest 1]: And if she comes to us definitely curious and eager to know what's going on.
[Guest 1]: But I do instinctively, intuitively realize and understand that ultimately, all this is
[Guest 1]: to bring my reader up to speed with what's happening.
[Guest 1]: And when I see that reader being taken for granted with this kind of thing, how many
[Guest 1]: people have turned around and told you that, you know, we don't trust the big media anymore.
[Guest 1]: Some have said it because it's kind of a, you know, everyone says it.
[Guest 1]: Some say it because it's not meeting their requirement.
[Guest 1]: But some say it because they're not getting what they think is authentic information.
[Guest 1]: If we are, of course, called all kinds of things, you know, Rahul Gandhi is funding
[Guest 1]: us and all that.
[Guest 1]: If they were funding us, we'd be in a 10 times better situation.
[Guest 1]: We're hand to mouth, basically.
[Guest 1]: But yes, it does worry me.
[Guest 1]: You know, I when I speak to students, I'm reminded of something that I may have read
[Guest 1]: years ago.
[Guest 1]: By the way, I was never told about these things by any senior.
[Guest 1]: There was no mission statement in my organization, or anywhere else.
[Guest 1]: But it gets into your system.
[Guest 1]: But I remember reading, I think it was HL Menken, who said, you know, journalism is
[Guest 1]: about comforting the afflicted and afflicting the comfortable.
[Guest 1]: And I think we are comforting the comfortable.
[Amit Varma]: And afflicting the afflicted by ignoring them.
[Guest 1]: But that too, but you know, all the stuff that is appearing is about so and so IIT topper
[Guest 1]: gets this salary.
[Guest 1]: This is kind of mollycoddling your reader with all kind of good news.
[Guest 1]: Indian cricket is covered as though we are the greatest in the world.
[Guest 1]: And I'm sorry, we're not.
[Guest 1]: India lost, England did not win alone, we lost badly.
[Guest 1]: I'll end on this.
[Guest 1]: There's a fantastic headline in one of the papers in Shekhar Kapoor's film, Elizabeth
[Guest 1]: went to the Oscars.
[Guest 1]: And it's a foreign production with a foreign cast with a director who happened to be of
[Guest 1]: Indian ethnic origin.
[Guest 1]: And it lost in the mainstream, they got only one or none awards in the Oscars.
[Guest 1]: And the headline in this paper in Delhi was, and the Oscars goes to apartheid.
[Guest 1]: I mean, look at the sheer idiocy about this statement.
[Guest 1]: You have firstly no idea what apartheid is.
[Guest 1]: And secondly, is it racism?
[Guest 1]: Or were they better films?
[Guest 1]: Is the world against us?
[Guest 1]: I mean, this sense of victimhood, this sense of wanting to win all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Victimhood and populism kind of go together.
[Guest 1]: This is, I'm sorry to say, Deutschland ber alles all over again, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end this episode by, that can't be your last word on the subject.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to end this episode by asking you guys one question with two parts each, which
[Amit Varma]: is what makes you hopeful and what makes you despair about the state of the media in India
[Amit Varma]: today?
[Guest 2]: Peter, let's start with you.
[Guest 2]: The hope is that we're having these conversations, for instance, you work with Pragati, which
[Guest 2]: is a startup in that sense, it was a relaunch of the magazine.
[Guest 2]: You're finding ways to fund it.
[Guest 2]: You're sitting here and doing this podcast and have been doing it for a while, have built
[Guest 2]: up readership and are not making money on it.
[Guest 2]: But you're doing it to build an audience.
[Guest 2]: Siddharth and the team that he's working with have found ways to deliver old fashioned journalism
[Guest 2]: in new ways.
[Guest 2]: And as I was saying just a few minutes ago, that people find the media still worth fighting
[Guest 2]: with or against is actually makes me optimistic because there's enough power there.
[Guest 2]: Those are all, I see young people, there are the young people who will be happy to reproduce
[Guest 2]: press releases for sure.
[Guest 2]: But I've seen a huge number of young people who are still burning with that desire to
[Guest 2]: go out there and tell truths, find out, dig.
[Guest 2]: Young people in my organization, interns who are willing to, you know, we had a kid in
[Guest 2]: here who didn't even do a one month internship.
[Guest 2]: She interned with us for six months, doing a full time college course, just so she could
[Guest 2]: get experience and for free, as in she wasn't even getting paid expenses.
[Guest 2]: All these things give me optimism for the future.
[Guest 2]: What makes me despair is this entire thing of this, again, internet enabled, I guess,
[Guest 2]: in some ways, the polarizations that have happened, that we will retreat and be content
[Guest 2]: to have our opinions confirmed rather than challenged.
[Guest 2]: You know, for me, I have always, I mean, this is doing what you, I know you don't like very
[Guest 2]: much virtue signaling, but for me, conversations like this are bloody interesting, because
[Guest 2]: I'm learning about things that I don't know anything about.
[Guest 2]: And it's going to make me sound like I'm trying to make myself look good.
[Guest 2]: But I think there's not enough of that, that we want our opinions confirmed more than challenged,
[Guest 2]: that we want to be made to feel good rather than to learn more.
[Guest 2]: And all of that kind of feeds into one another.
[Guest 2]: And it's sad that as you know, as that was also just saying a little while ago, it's
[Guest 2]: why are people pissed off with the mainstream media, we need to do a lot of introspection
[Guest 2]: on that as well.
[Guest 2]: There are lots of things I think that we in the big media have not got right by any means.
[Guest 2]: And that's why people were so ready to believe the worst of us.
[Guest 2]: And if we don't figure those out and find ways to deal with that, and if we don't figure
[Guest 2]: out how to make it commercially viable to produce good journalism, we're screwed.
[Guest 2]: I hope we will.
[Guest 2]: I hope we will while I'm still earning a salary in the media, and you know, I've not found
[Guest 2]: some other way to make an income.
[Guest 1]: But it makes me worry.
[Guest 1]: So,
[Guest 1]: So despair, I thought I was, you know, spooning out the despair.
[Guest 1]: My despair is, apart from all the things I mentioned is that a lot of fantastic youngsters
[Guest 1]: who are coming to this profession, full of passion, full of ideas, full of willingness
[Guest 1]: to do work, and journalism schools are full as you know, but are either not willing or
[Guest 1]: not encouraged to do walk the streets and get the story.
[Guest 1]: You know, Google, mobile phone, Wikipedia, one court formula, and there it goes.
[Guest 1]: And you need bosses who say sorry, not working.
[Guest 1]: So when I meet a I, we've just taken a guy who will go to extraordinarily remote places
[Guest 1]: and come back with stories on not the usual rural distress and all that.
[Guest 1]: But and not even rural hope.
[Guest 1]: That's the other thing.
[Guest 1]: Everything should not be hope or distress.
[Guest 1]: But come back with state of the ground, a state of the grassroots stories, you know,
[Guest 1]: bread and butter like work.
[Guest 1]: And I if any young reporters listening to me, I would say to her, please go out and
[Guest 1]: report.
[Guest 1]: If you were talking about how you travel down the coast of Tamil Nadu, you were doing old
[Guest 1]: fashioned solid ground reporting, you could have easily, you know, sat there and kind
[Guest 1]: of assembled this that and the other.
[Guest 1]: So I that's a professional despair that really, the hope is equally kind of it's actually
[Guest 1]: connected.
[Guest 1]: I get invited to speak to students everywhere.
[Guest 1]: I'm in Pune day after tomorrow, speaking to you at a university, large numbers turn up.
[Guest 1]: I like to think that we must be doing something which wants them to connect and listen to
[Guest 1]: us, not because we are evangelists.
[Guest 1]: I'm a corporate evangelist because I'm constantly looking for money.
[Guest 1]: But we are not media evangelists at all.
[Guest 1]: But that gives me hope.
[Guest 1]: Public union elections in JNU have given me hope.
[Guest 1]: Not because the leftists won, because they saw something about uniting that these opposition
[Guest 1]: parties have not been able to understand.
[Guest 1]: So all those things give me hope.
[Guest 1]: You know, people say, oh, the emergency all over again, rubbish.
[Guest 1]: The emergency was terrible.
[Guest 1]: Things are not good, but it was terrible.
[Guest 1]: But what really pisses me off and despairs is that the establishment, media establishment
[Guest 1]: is letting down the side and its own staff and its own readers.
[Guest 1]: So this I would end on when I see all these small efforts popping up and when you said
[Guest 1]: somebody is making money on subscriptions and all that they are not successful in a
[Guest 1]: huge way.
[Guest 1]: The Times of India is 180 years old, but by something in a few years, you are going to
[Guest 1]: see more and more youngsters coming in saying, hey, this is not working.
[Guest 1]: I wanted to start something of my own or join somewhere, learn and then go out and do something
[Guest 1]: on my own.
[Guest 1]: So on the whole, I think I've been listening to you intently, Peter.
[Guest 1]: Technology is going to be a huge driver of ideas and innovation.
[Guest 1]: And if those old and new worlds can be married effectively, I think we are on to a damn good
[Amit Varma]: track.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great note of hope to end on.
[Amit Varma]: More power to all the young people listening to the show want to make a change and more
[Amit Varma]: power also to my fellow old fogies here, Peter and Siddharth.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: You ain't no old fogie, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Well, relative to the young people who are going to.
[Guest 1]: He didn't say that.
[Guest 2]: He didn't say that.
[Guest 2]: He said the two old fogies.
[Guest 2]: I said to my fellow old fogies, I regard myself perfectly as an old fogie.
[Amit Varma]: Irrelevant to this new world, but please someone make it happen.
[Guest 1]: Thank you very much, Amit.
[Guest 1]: This was enjoyable and thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, please do go over to the wire.in, donate if you can.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Siddharth on Twitter at Bombaywala, B-O-M-B-A-Y-W-A-L-L-A-H.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Peter at ZigZagly, Z-I-G-Z-A-C-K-L-Y.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at SeenUnseen.in or ThinkPragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: See you
[Unknown]: great entrepreneurs. We've had Dishan Hayat from Topper, Naya Sagi from Baby Chakra,
[Unknown]: Ankur Sachdev from ShareChat, and Akrit from Haptic, among many, many more.
[Unknown]: And we continue to get some of the biggest, smartest, and most innovative folks in the
[Unknown]: country in this space coming here, talking to us, all for you guys to listen to.
[Unknown]: So tune in every Tuesday on the IBM app website or wherever you get your podcasts from and get
[Unknown]: a chance to be a part of all of the tech banter and entrepreneurship conversations on our Slack
[Unknown]: channel. Talk to our guests, they show up as well. All you have to do is request an
[Unknown]: invite on ibmpodcast.com slash junior one. Every week comes a show where three people
[Unknown]: come together to tell you about stuff they like a movie, a TV show, a book, and other stuff.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Monday on the IBM podcast app to IBM likes.
[Unknown]: Batman approves this message. Thank you, Batman.